I'm speaking at SFIs for a public lecture, I think around over 20 years ago, when I was still young, they had a compression on me for thinking that I had new physics type thinking in ecology.
He's been at UC Berkeley, the answer to SFI for a long, long time, doing incredible research. That's a big interface of math, physics, biology, very ecology focused, really asking the deep ecology questions, but bringing the bear whatever tools you can, putting maximum lots of
Thank you, John.
Thank you.
I always enjoy coming here and talking with people and refreshing myself.
I'm going to talk about bungee and forests and a very controversial topic, group selection.
You've probably heard, you can't help but hear about new developments in our understanding, we hope it's real understanding, of forests and the symbiotic relationships that arise in forests with the bacteria and the fungi and the soil.
There's been lots of interesting speculation, some good science and some hype.
Here are some examples of the hype, but there's also real science behind some of the new developments in our understanding of how fungi and trees interact.
The headlines go overboard.
We didn't invent the internet, plants did, and in fact they claim they made it even better than we, than our internet.
There's, of course, inevitable pushback against speculative claims that talk about super organisms and use of the word communication when we talk about the relationships among trees.
The concept of the mother tree has been advanced and opposed by many. Nature, ecology and evolution in 2023 had an article, and I'm just giving one quote from it, positive citation bias and overinterpreted results lead to misinformation on common mycorrhizal networks in forests.
Just last night, a new article in Nature came across my email and it's a review of this whole concept of the mother tree.
The mother tree idea is everywhere now, it wasn't before, but how much of it is real and the article delves into the controversy.
What I want to argue here is that the reality of forests and fungi is much more interesting than anything I've just flashed on the screen for you, and I want to try to convince you of that.
The talk really is in three parts. The first part I think is pretty rock solid.
The second part begins to delve a bit into speculation, but strong support, and the third part is wildly blue sky speculation.
So that's the outline of my talk.
The work I'm going to revisit in the first two-thirds of the talk is work that was initiated actually a long time ago, three decades ago, by a graduate student of mine, Ann Kinzick, who is now an ecology professor at Arizona State.
There were two key papers that came out in the 90s, one in the American Naturalist and one in the British Journal of Ecology, which really go into great detail, and much of my talk will be a summary of the major conclusions from these papers.
The story really begins with the nitrogen cycle, and I've shown here a simple schematic of how nitrogen, an essential nutrient for plants, and microorganisms is cycled.
It's a little bit oversimplified, but it contains the essence of the nitrogen cycle. Green plants die, and the nitrogen in the plants becomes part of the nitrogen in the soil, part of the humus, part of the organic substrate.
If it's a lake, then the nitrogen in the dead algae, or a kelp, or whatever, become dissolved into the water, and you have dissolved organic carbon compounds.
Microbes also die, and their dead little corpses become part of the soil-organic matter pool, and microbes derive their nitrogen directly from the soil-organic matter, what they actually do.
It's a bit more complicated than the diagram suggests. They convert organic nitrogen, like the nitrogen found in amino acids, into inorganic nitrogen, ammonium and nitrate, and then they take up the ammonium and the nitrate.
So it's sort of a little bit roundabout, but that's the way they function.
And the ammonium and nitrate, which is produced by the microbes, chewing on organic matter, is then available for the plants, who also need the nitrogen.
Okay, that's the nitrogen cycle, except I'm not showing you some little tweaks, which are at the one or two percent, maybe five percent level, making this not quite a perfectly closed system.
There's nitrogen fixation from the atmosphere and other processes, leaching, but this is the essence of the cycle.
And now if we turn to what motivated the work I'm going to talk about, a seemingly trivial minor question came up.
I asked it at a symposium on the nitrogen cycle that was taking place at Berkeley, and somebody was presented a diagram more or less like this, and I asked the question, what determines the ratio of B to A in an ecosystem?
Okay, there were all kinds of answers ranging from idiosyncratic or maybe governed by some law, but we don't know what it is.
Actually, a few people in the audience said that the question was ignorant.
It didn't matter what the ratio was, so why ask the question?
Well, it will turn out it does matter, because the ratio will give us some interesting insight into much deeper, bigger issues, like group selection, as we'll see.
So what determines how much of this nutritious, inorganic nitrogen is taken up by microbes, including both fungi and bacteria, and how much is taken up by plants?
How do they share this common resource? They're competing for it, so they've got to figure out a way to share.
Okay, to answer what happened is after that symposium, Ann and I got together and we said, we've got to figure this out.
This seems trivial, but my guess was it was not idiosyncratic, that there was something going on and it would be worth trying to figure it out.
And we realized very quickly that we'd also have to turn to the carbon cycle, not just look alone at the nitrogen cycle, but also carbon.
Okay, here's a pretty picture of the carbon cycle, but maybe this will make things a little more clear.
Green plants take CO2 from the atmosphere. They also respire it back.
And when they die, the dead plant matter becomes the carbon in the soil, the organic carbon.
The organic carbon is chewed up by the microbes.
In fact, the microbes wouldn't exist, at least the current types of microbes, without this carbon because breaking down the carbon bonds in the organic matter in the soil is how they get their energy.
So this is the food that powers the microbes, and then the microbes also respire and produce CO2.
So this is the carbon cycle, and it's important to mention to emphasize that plant-derived organic carbon is the energy source for most microbes.
There are some that can get their energy from other compounds, especially in the deep sea, but we're not going to go into that.
Now, let's combine the two cycles, and we'll see something interesting.
I've just sort of superimposed those pictures that you saw before because they're both going on at the same time.
And now we see that there are two distinct things happening in this combined carbon-nitrogen cycle.
There is mutualism, and by that I mean that microbes need plants.
Microbes require the organic carbon produced by plants to get their energy.
Plants need microbes because without the microbes, all that organic nitrogen would stay in organic form.
The microbes turn it into inorganic nitrate and ammonium, which is what the plants need for their nitrogen supply.
So plants need microbes, microbes need plants. That's a mutualism.
On the other hand, they are both competing for this pool of inorganic nitrogen. That's the AB thing.
So think about it. Suppose one of the two, let's say microbes, control the switch.
They get to go first, and suppose they pig out. They say, we're going to just take as much nitrogen as we can.
What would happen?
Well, there'd be none left over for the plants. Plants would die, and eventually there'd be no carbon for the microbes.
On the other hand, they might be really selfless, utterly extreme altruistic and just forgo nitrogen, leave it all for the plants,
and then what would happen? They would die out, and then eventually the plants wouldn't have nitrate.
So you don't get carbon for the microbes if the microbes pick out, and you don't get nitrogen for the plants if the microbes are overly selfless.
So somewhere in between, there's got to be a happy, medium, optimum point.
You're going to see.
So this is just summarizing what I just said.
In a nutshell, here's the situation.
I want to show you this diagram, because we're going to look for this diagram later on in human society and elsewhere in nature,
and see that it's not just a property of this particular system.
That's where the and us comes in in the title.
Okay, here's the situation in a nutshell.
We have x and y.
Y helps x, x helps y, and they're competing for a resource.
How do you resolve that?
I'm going to first take a look at what I call a microbe maximizing strategy, MMS.
Later we can look at PMS, which is plant maximizing strategy.
So let's pretend the microbes control the gate.
They get to go first.
They take their share and leave the rest for the plants.
We're going to take, make them look at two models, both of which have been validated empirically, and I'll show you how,
to look at what happens in combined nitrogen carbon cycle models to test the MMS hypothesis.
We can say that the hypothesis is microbes allocate to their own growth.
They pick that ratio of B to A, so that they are maximizing their population size.
Let's just look at that as a hypothesis.
See what it predicts, and then see if we can test it.
We can also look at maximizing their growth rate.
I'll show you what happens when you do that as well.
Okay, we'll compare the predictions to available data, and then we're going to, after that,
look at a spatially explicit checkerboard, huge checkerboard,
in other words, a spatially explicit grid-based version of the model,
in which we can actually look at a mechanism that achieves the MMS.
And I'll show you what conditions have to hold in order for the MMS to be valid.
That is to evolve, to undergo Darwinian evolution and come about in reality.
Okay, here are the major assumptions of the two core models I'm going to show you.
I'm not going to go through all these, it will take too long, but I'm ignoring nitrogen fixation
because those little 2% terms that make the nitrogen cycle open rather than closed.
And I'm going to ignore diurnal, et cetera, variation, stochastic variation.
I'm going to assume the system in some average way is in a steady state.
I'm not going to look at highly disturbed ecosystems, which are different tomorrow than they are today,
very different next year than they are this year.
I'm going to look at a quasi-steady state and a bunch of other assumptions.
They're all explicitly listed.
I think I've listed every assumption we've made.
And there are two models.
One I call the rhizosphere model, and it's sketched over here.
We have the organic nitrogen, which I just call N now.
This is the dead plant matter and dead microbe matter that contains organic forms of nitrogen,
the plants, the microbes, and the inorganic nitrogen, which I'm calling I.
And you can write down a set of equations that are generalizations of what's called the Latke-Vulterra equations
in ecology, which many of you know about.
And they are sort of the simplest things you can write down in the form of differential equations
that contain a description of the processes that are shown in the diagram.
It's a minimal model.
It's what I like to call a spherical cow model.
You can make it much more complicated, and we've done that.
We've looked at relaxing the assumptions one by one.
Do they change the predictions?
The answer is no, unless some huge, like if two-thirds of the nitrogen leeches out of the forest every year,
then you would start to violate the predictions that we make.
So why a rhizosphere model?
Well, you'll notice I don't have an organic carbon pool in here.
I don't have the organic carbon in the soil.
Why? Because the microbes are getting their carbon from the roots of the plants.
Not the roots, actually, but the fungi that infest the roots.
These are called rhizospheric fungi, and we don't have to include a separate carbon pool.
We can just call it the plant pool because the plant roots are the place where this action occurs.
It's a little bit oversimplified in that sense, but I'll show you next a carbon model that contains maybe things you're happier with.
Here's the carbon model, and it's very much like the rhizosphere model, except now there's an explicit carbon pool that's separate from the plant pool,
rather than the carbon pool being in the roots of the plants.
Okay, I'll use the symbols P, M, N, and I to refer to the nitrogen content in these pools.
That is, the nitrogen content of the plants will be labeled P.
So this isn't the mass of a tree, the trees in the forest.
It's the mass of the nitrogen in the trees in the forest, and the same is true for the microbes.
The unit, the thing that's flowing around in the model is nitrogen, not carbohydrate,
the complicated organic compounds.
The carbon model, the rhizosphere model describes many forests.
Forests tend to have lots of rhizospheric fungi, and we kind of think of the rhizosphere model as a forest model.
The carbon model is a good model for aquatic systems, where you don't have roots infested with rhizospheric fungi.
Farmland and annual grassland, and some forests.
Conifer forests tend to look more like the rhizosphere model, deciduous forests,
in some cases would look more like the carbon model.
We're going to look at both of these models and run them in parallel and see what kinds of predictions they make.
Okay, just a quick note.
Why should we trust the models?
The best way to test a model is not to look at what it says about steady states,
but to kick the system, perturb it, and then ask the model, can you predict the response to the perturbation?
It's a much more realistic and thorough way to test a model.
So we've set up systems, in this case I'm just showing you the results for some aquatic systems,
for which we use the carbon model, and what we did is we took buckets of water out of a biologically rich lake,
set up replicate microcosms in the laboratory, and added organic carbon to them,
and then asked how does it get distributed over time,
and in particular we asked about the concentration of the inorganic nitrogen that rises as the microbes start to eat the organic matter
that was added experimentally as a manipulation to the microcosms.
So picture rows and rows of replicate buckets of water, and adding different amounts of organic carbon to replicate systems.
Yeah.
What was the DOM that you added?
I'm sorry, what?
Like glucose or glutamate?
What was the organic matter?
Yeah, it was dead microbes.
That turned out to be something we could make, and it was uniform and rapidly digestible by other microbes.
We didn't want to add something recalcitrant because it would take too long.
And as you can see, we ran this thing for about a week,
and what we saw experimentally is the inorganic nitrogen level shot up,
depending on how much addition of organic carbon we added to the system.
So if you make a 48 percent increase in the amount of organic carbon,
you don't see any increase at all, undetectable, in the inorganic nitrogen.
But if you double it, you see a big increase.
So there's sort of a threshold effect in here, and 180 percent goes up, 300 percent even higher.
Notice it peaks at a later and later time, so there's a lag effect, the lead peak, and a threshold effect.
Okay.
Since it's an aquatic system, we use the carbon model to evaluate what should happen in the model if you do this experiment to it.
And this is what the model predicts.
There was only one adjustable parameter, which referred to the degree of what's called density dependence in the death rates of the microbes.
That's a thing that's hard to measure directly.
And in fact, this experiment provided a way to measure density dependence,
because if you tweak density dependence a little bit, your predictions start to look different.
But we capture with the model the threshold and the delayed peak.
So we have confidence in the model.
That's really all this slide is supposed to tell you.
Just make a couple definitions.
I'm going to let rho be the ratio of two ratios, the ratio of the C to N ratio of the microbes.
That's carbon to nitrogen divided by the ratio of carbon to nitrogen in plants.
This is usually a small number.
This is typically about six.
This is often anywhere from eight or 10 to 30 or 40, depending on the type of plant.
So there's a flow weighted ratio of carbon to nitrogen in plants, microbes.
And so it's always less than one empirically, although theoretically there's no reason why it couldn't be bigger than one.
Alpha will be the ratio of the amount of nitrogen in plants.
That's what we call capital P before, plus capital I, the amount of inorganic nitrogen in the plants.
It's the ratio of the sum of those two pools of nitrogen to twice the nitrogen in the dead organic matter.
So in symbols it's P plus I divided by two N.
And alpha's always much less than one in any real ecosystem for which data are available.
The soil contains much more nitrogen than in the inorganic form than is in the nitrogen in plants and in the inorganic pool.
This next symbol, beta, is the thing we set out questioning.
What's the ratio of B to A or A to A plus B in our previous notation?
So the question now is if we take those models and look at their steady states
by solving the simultaneous equations with the derivative set to zero
and then maximize microbial biomass, what does it predict about this quantity beta?
And we'll see it to be a function of alpha and rho, both of which are very easily measured.
So that's the strategy.
The math, I think as I recall it was about 10 or 15 pages of legal pad size algebra
to solve for the maximum, to solve the simultaneous equations and get the solution.
For the carbon model, this is beta as a function of rho and alpha.
I know it's ugly, but it just really does come out.
Notice there are two solutions with a plus and minus sign.
Both of these lead to positive values of beta and you asked about multiple solutions.
There they are, there are two.
In the rhizosphere model, there's only one solution, beta is one half minus alpha.
And again, alpha and beta, sorry, yeah, rho and alpha are easily measured.
And the rhizosphere model, rho doesn't matter.
If we put in real numbers from various data sets, we looked at about 30 data sets
to get estimated ranges of alpha and rho.
And what we get as a prediction is in the carbon model beta should be between 0.75 and 0.95
or between 0.05 and 0.2.
In other words, microbes either take a relatively small share or a very large share.
In the case of the rhizosphere model, beta is one half minus alpha, alpha is very small
and beta has come out to be between 0.45 and 0.50.
So in rhizosphere applicable systems like many far, most far as,
we expect roughly a 50-50 division of alpha, of A and B.
And here are some data.
Well, I'm summarizing a bunch of data.
For the carbon model where aquatic systems are the best example,
tropical lagoon value of 0.89, a temperate deciduous forest with lots of rhizosphere at Fungi,
a value of 0.79 within the range predicted.
A largely rhizospheric system prediction was between 0.45 and 0.50.
A perennial shortgrass prairie had a value of right on the nose at 0.50.
We don't have good data for forests that are not rhizospheric.
There are very few people make these measurements of both A and B.
It turns out you have to do something called nitrogen isotope pool dilution,
which is a very tricky and complicated empirical method for deriving
what biogeochemists call the net and the gross nitrogen mineralization rates.
So there's not a lot of data.
So we don't have strong support empirically for the theory.
We have consistent consistency with the theory,
but not strong overwhelming support with 30, 40, 50 databases.
We just don't have the data.
An annual grassland system, which was characterized as having a mix of free-living and rhizospheric microbes.
So neither model would be directly applicable,
and the authors of the paper didn't know what the ratio was of the free-living to the rhizospheric microorganisms.
Its beta value fell outside the range of any of our predictions.
It's not obviously MMS, but it might be.
We'd have to know more about the system in order to use that data set.
Okay, so we have suggestive but not overwhelming evidence for the MMS.
The question then arises, how might the MMS evolve?
Let's first naively think about two types of microbes.
Strategists that follow the micro-maximizing strategy.
These are the guys that know how to maximize that function and they obey it.
We'll call them strategists.
I don't want to call them altruists for a reason we'll get to later.
I think this is a little different from altruism as it's conventionally and usefully defined.
And then we'll have tacticians who pig out at a rate far exceeding the micro-maximizing strategy rate.
Okay, what happens?
Well, if we have two jugs of water and we put tacticians or pig out pigs in one bucket
and strategists in the other bucket, you can guess what will happen.
The tacticians grow faster at first because they have a higher uptake rate,
but they reach a lower level.
The strategists start out slowly and reach a higher level.
So the microbes that can do the math end up better off.
But if you put those together in the same bucket, then what's going to happen?
Well, you can do it mathematically, but you can also do the experiment.
And the experiment has been done in many guises.
And what happens is the strategists are outcompeted by the tacticians.
In this phase of growth, the tacticians outnumber the microbes, they outcompete them,
and they actually eventually die out.
And you can see it by running the model,
but as I said, the people have also done these competition experiments with organisms with different traits.
So that says nature doesn't have organisms living completely isolated from each other,
and we don't see that or that.
So what's going on?
Well, to go further, I'm going to show you just the result.
I'm not going to try to show you how the model actually works in detail.
But what we did is we set up a large, spatially explicit grid.
I think it was 64 by 64 cells, big checkerboard.
And we populated it with microorganisms and trees.
Populated it in the model.
We didn't do this experiment.
It would be a lovely experiment to try to do, but I don't think NSF would fund it.
So this is a very typical approach in certain areas of evolutionary biology
to set up spatially explicit models and allow for several things to happen.
You can't just leave each grid cell isolated from the next one,
or else it will look like that figure I showed you earlier.
And you can't have the mix very rapidly,
because then it will look like the other bucket experiment I showed you,
where the mixing causes the die-out of the strategies.
So we want something in between.
We're also going to look at four genotypes of the microbe.
I should say phenotype.
We don't really look at genes in this model.
We have overly selfless.
We have the strategic optimizers.
These are the guys that solve the math,
and then an intermediate, higher level of uptake,
and then the tactical glutton.
So we have these four types of microbes,
and we're going to populate different types randomly across that grid.
In each cell, we'll get one type chosen at random from the four.
We're going to populate every cell with some plants.
They're not going to differ genetically or phenotypically.
They're just plants.
Another step in this whole thing would be to put in different varieties of plants.
But mathematically, I don't think it matters.
Random assignment of the microbe.
Oh, it's a 50 by 50 grid, not 64 by 64.
We're going to allow weak diffusion of inorganic nitrogen between nearest neighbors.
So we're going to have a diffusion constant.
Nitrogen can leak from one cell to its neighbor.
And we're going to do random extirpation of microbes and plants in grid cells
with recolonization by the nearest neighbor at the most biomass.
That is, you take a cell and now and then wipe it off the board
and repopulate it with this offspring of the nearest neighbors to it,
whichever nearest neighbor has the highest number of the highest biomass of microbes.
So that's really the numerical experiment is right there.
And I'm not going to tell you how we run it and all that stuff.
I just want to show you quickly some of the results.
Black means the optimizers, A2, are the dominant at the end of the run.
White means the selfish guys ended up at the end of the run.
These are the gluttons.
And gray was at A3.
It's sort of an intermediate between optimizer and glutton.
And I'm not going to show you A1 because they all died out in every run.
This poor selfless microbes disappear.
They get out and competed.
So the rhizosphere model is shown here.
And the carbon model is shown here.
And what's shown on these axes are diffusion rates.
The two sets within the rhizosphere model represent low rate of plant disturbance
and a high rate of plant disturbance.
Because we also displace the plant.
We extirpate the plants every now and then as well.
And as you can see, it makes a difference.
At a high rate, you get far fewer dominance of the optimizers.
Oh, yeah.
Epsilon is the rate of microbe extirpation.
And delta is the rate of diffusion of nitrogen between neighbors.
But in the rhizosphere model with low plant disturbance, quite a few,
but by no means all, of the runs under these different conditions of epsilon and delta
lead to dominance of the micromexamizing bacteria.
In the carbon model, there's only a few.
It makes a low diffusion rate and a low extirpation rate.
So this is kind of evidence for that it could exist.
These can evolve under certain conditions.
But there are many conditions in which the micromexamizing strategy won't evolve.
But when you look in detail, it kind of makes sense.
If you have too high a rate of diffusion, there's too much mingling.
Or if you have too high a rate of extirpation, there's too high a rate of mingling.
And then you're back effectively to the situation in this model, this situation,
where you have mixing.
Too much mixing, bad.
No mixing would work, but it's not what happens in nature.
And so this is a summary then of what the models predict for outcomes
under different rates of extirpation, different rates of diffusion.
What's going on?
What led to even some of those grid cells becoming all black,
all optimizing at the end of the run?
It's an example of what Ed Wilson and David Sloan Wilson, the two Wilson's,
who are strong advocates of group selection being important in nature,
what they call group selection.
Group selection is a concept that had come under huge ridicule,
scorn, and fire in the 60s and 70s by evolutionary biologists who said,
group selection, theoretically maybe it could occur,
but the conditions under which it can arise are so extreme that you'll never see it in nature.
And since then, Ed Wilson has shown, I think, convincingly,
but not everybody agrees that group selection explains much of the reason
for the origin of sociality in insects,
that group selection rather than kin selection is a dominating mechanism
in the evolution of social, sociality in bees and ants and so on.
In group selection, you select an outcome that would generally not arise
if all the phenotypes were well mixed all the time.
So it requires some kind of spatial separation, but not too much.
If you don't have any mixing, then you don't get that outcome either.
And nothing in nature is completely isolated.
So that's not an option.
Group selection, in our example, can lead to behavior
which would reasonably be called altruistic if the groups were well mixed.
That is, if you see a population of microbes behaving at this optimal point,
you would say that they were altruistic if you didn't know
that they came to dominance by a group selection mechanism.
You would think that they could have been more greedy.
They could have been gluttonous and done better.
The model says they wouldn't, but you would think they could
if you didn't know about the model and about the group selection process
and you would call them altruistic.
But one of them would have done better if none of the others changed.
Exactly.
But in our altruists...
Yeah, in that case they would be truly altruistic.
But that is the case you describe.
In what?
That's the case you describe.
An altruist is somebody who, by shifting...
Yeah, that's a perfectly good definition of altruism.
Yeah, so why do you resist calling them altruists?
Because it's evolving in a situation in which they are...
Each individual microbe is better off this way than being off the grid.
Wait, each individual microbe is not best responding to the strategies as you call them.
They're doing what's best for them collectively.
But one of them would do better if they deviated.
Do better in isolation or in that environment?
In that environment as well.
It would do better in the short term.
Yes.
But in the long term, its progeny wouldn't be there.
That genotype would die out.
Yeah, so do we want to use the word altruistic?
I mean, in the next 24 hours I'm better off or do I want it to mean
I'm leaving a future lineage that has my traits.
So that's the distance.
That's why I don't like to use the word altruistic
because I'd like to use the word altruistic.
I mean, not just the next 24 hours, but in the long run.
Well, you've defined altruism as such a way
that it could never evolve by natural selection.
That's right.
Exactly.
You do know we do.
I don't like, I like to use the word altruism
for something that doesn't occur.
Right?
Yeah.
I'd like to reserve that word.
A long time ago.
It's just a personality version of the genuine.
Yeah.
So altruism in game theory.
I'm sorry, when?
Altruism in game theory is defined as you say.
Yes, as did Marcus Feldman and all the other people.
I mean, I didn't invent that definition.
Right.
No, I know.
So altruism in evolutionary theory is defined as the way you say it.
Okay.
So if I'm going to, if I use the word altruism the way you and Mark do,
then okay, fine.
But I would like to reserve it for,
I would like to think more about what lineage has survived
over revolutionary time.
I love your model.
What?
I love this model.
Yeah.
Practically, I, he's talking about the reality of the situation is
that we aren't simply living day to day,
but really the reality of what survives in this world throughout time
is the long term picture.
I just got a couple more things to go through.
One is just in case you were curious,
suppose I flipped the coin over and said,
let's do a plant maximizing strategy.
Would we get the same outcome?
And the answer is just about this.
Oh, sorry.
No, this is different.
This is instead of maximizing biomass of microbes,
suppose we might maximize their growth rate in the study state,
their gross growth rate.
If we do that, we get almost the same optimal point.
Here's a one, a two.
Here's the macro maximizing curve.
Here's the plant maximizing curve.
Not very different.
It'd be hard to tell them apart.
And I thought I had a slide of the plant micro.
Oh, yeah.
Here, several, a couple of slides.
What about a plant maximizing strategy?
In this case, the outcome is nearly similar to what we had before,
but not quite.
In the case of a plant micro maximizing strategy,
beta instead of one half minus alpha is one half plus alpha and alpha prime.
And alpha prime, instead of p plus i over 2n, is m plus i over 2n.
So it's almost a symmetric result when you maximize the plant biomass.
And in all the systems we have, alpha prime is very small,
and so the two results converge on the beta equals a half result
for the rhizosphere model.
The carbon model turns out not to have a solution
if you have plant maximizing strategy.
It just doesn't have a maximum point.
Plants should just pick out if they had control of the inorganic nitrogen switch.
But now I want to turn to the most loose guy part of this talk,
which is what else might this basic diagram that I showed you at the beginning describe
to mutualists competing for a resource?
These pollinators on plants provide a possible example.
These help plants by pollinating.
Plants help bees by supplying nectar,
but the resource that the plants make the nectar from
is competed for by both the pollinators and the plants.
The plants could use that nectar for some other purpose,
like making bigger roots and becoming more drought resistant.
But no, they use it to attract pollinators.
So again, we could ask the question, and we haven't done this,
but I'm just posing it as something interesting that could be done
but the same kind of reasoning is to look at the question of allocation of nectar
and resources between plants and microbes.
What about the human economy?
This is really the reason why I decided to give this talk,
because I think especially during the Reagan and Trump years
when you start to think about how big an issue it is
with what we do with national income.
How do we allocate it?
Let's call the wealth of the nation, it's capital wealth.
And Sam, I want you to really chime in here because I'm misusing terms
and I'm sure I'm botching the economics,
but I want to get you to help me think about this better.
We can use it to increase industrial production, factory output,
material goods, other things that we need or don't need but still produce, plastic.
This is plastic.
Okay, so we can use capital wealth to improve that.
One way to get more capital wealth going into production is to lower taxes on businesses.
Make them more wealthy.
Then there's less wealth left over for the environment,
for public health, education, et cetera, et cetera.
I'm just going to lump all these things, you just call it EHE,
environment, health, and etiquette, but it includes more than this.
It's the things that are not made in factories
and make life worth living.
The mutualism is that EHE requires capital produced by production.
Production requires EHE, so each needs the other.
The mutualism that EHE requires production is actually through capital wealth.
We can also argue about environmental degradation and its destructive effects on capital wealth,
but we don't even need to put that in, even though it's important.
Competition is obvious, both production and EHE compete for capital wealth.
It's the same diagram we had before with the fungi in the forest or the bee in the flower.
There ought to be an optimal allocation of wealth.
You could set up a model and put in reasonable functions describing the flows
and ask what determines the ratio of A over B,
the ratio of capital wealth to EHE versus capital wealth to production,
or better yet, what should determine A over B,
or more specifically, what taxation, budgetary policies, et cetera,
would result in the optimal allocation.
You'll get a solution and then you can ask,
does it look anything like where the U.S. and other wealthy nations are now?
Are we near an optimal point given the simultaneous mutualism and cooperation?
I looked at a model which I just cooked up.
I had a little bit of help from Herman Daly doing this.
I guess you all know he died tragically this year,
but Herman was interested in the stuff I was doing.
He sketched how one might put it together and make a model.
We're going to maximize some kind of objective function, W,
which is some measure of the utility function.
It's a measure of the things we want in our economy, in our life.
I just cooked up the absolutely simplest possible,
and I'm sure economists will ruin about this and can help me with it.
I wrote equations for welfare as a function of P and E.
E stands for EHE. I just lumped it all into E.
Then I wrote, instead of differential equations,
productivity at time I is productivity at time I minus 1
times some combination of capital and E,
which is required to make more production.
Educated labor force, for example, is in this symbol E.
Then you can write equations for how E is degraded by production,
and it's enhanced by capital wealth flowing to the education sector.
Capital itself increases because of production and interest on capital here.
The question then is how can we vary this critical parameter W,
which is a way of thinking about the allocation ratio
in order to maximize W up here.
When you solve that there is an optimum,
I have no idea how to put in numbers for the variables
and make it look realistic.
I just don't know enough economics to know how to do that.
I don't know what's reasonable for the exponents A and B,
or for these parameters R, M, G, and C.
That's where we are with this.
It's suggestive and I think interesting,
and I think there would be an interesting outcome
if one could really set this up realistically and solve for the optimum.
My guess, of course, and I'm sure all of you would probably guess,
that we're allocating way too little to education, environment, and health.
But this would be a way to quantitatively demonstrate
how much less are we allocating than we should if we want to maximize well-being.
Here's where I really overreached.
That was blue sky, and now we're even above the blue.
There are no molecules up here.
We're in the ionosphere.
We don't normally think in terms of how some advantageous tax law
or other social policy is selected for culturally.
I suppose we think in terms of cultural selection,
and we sort of follow the strategy I took with the plant microbe example.
We could think about weakly interacting societies,
which transfer goods, there's diffusion of resources,
there's extirpation occasionally,
and how will different strategies of economic allocation
evolve under different scenarios for this spatially explicit world
in which we have different experimental economies in different places?
Would the outcome look optimal?
I think if we could write down a model that looks like this toy model
of competition and mutualism for the economy
and do a spatially explicit grid type solution,
we would find that some kind of optimal solution should evolve.
I started thinking about this.
The US became the dominant world power.
We somehow maximized an awful lot of stuff between 1776 and 1900.
How did we do it?
Is there anything in here that helps us understand that?
I was thinking, well, the Monroe Doctrine,
that was a really neat thing in some ways.
It also had some terrible implications for colonialism in South America,
but as a global strategy of isolating us,
at least to a great extent, not completely,
but partially isolating us from the rest of the world,
we allowed some kind of very successful economic allocation strategy to arise.
I'm not saying it's one that maximized health or education or environment.
It certainly didn't.
But something got optimized as a result of the fact that we kept Europe at bay
for decades and decades, for a century.
So is there anything about the world today
in which there's enormous amounts of diffusion, if you like,
between cultures and countries?
The world is so mixed that in such a situation,
is it possible that strategic optimizing outcomes are not likely to occur?
There's too much mixing, and we are, in a sense,
going towards some suboptimal kind of culturally evolutionarily,
cultural evolution outcome.
I have no idea.
I just find the speculation interesting, and I thought I'd share it with you.
So that, I think, is the end of my talk.
Yes.
John, what about the gift economy?
How does that fit into?
Tell me more about the gift economy.
The gift economy is really how you operate without the capital that we're used to operating with.
We operate in, so you need, I'm growing a whole lot of corn,
and you need some corn, and so you trade with me.
And we have that kind of...
Sam, you sort of talked about that a little bit in your science paper, didn't you?
Yeah, but a lot of the stuff in the science paper is exactly the same.
Something at the end is not at all optimal.
I'm glad to hear that.
I think a really fascinating problem for you in the last couple of slides you're following.
In Europe, in 1450, there were something like 450 sovereign states, or state bodies.
I mean, some were run by pirates, and some were bishoprics, and so on, but they were sovereign, right?
And then, by the time of the First World War, that had been reduced to 26.
And what had happened over that period of time was been a vast homogenization of what we observed.
No more bishoprics, no more pirates running things.
We had a single form of government, which was the national state.
So that's exactly the process you're talking about.
And of course, in that situation, extirpation is there, migration among states, and so on.
So what you're talking about there has real impact in society that can be studied using the tools you have.
Back to Bobby's question, what about pre-Columbus U.S. or North America?
Tribes of people with different gift economies, I think, would be the right use of your term.
I mean, I can't study that. There's been a number of studies of group selection in New Guinea, which is easy to do.
Things like, and you can put into models, different levels of food sharing in a society.
You can just write down a whole bunch of equations, which are in different forms of something called reproductive leveling.
That is, anything which reduces the variance of reproductive success within a group has a huge effect on a soil.
It gives much greater space for group selection because it takes the graph on the right that you showed where the good guys are going to lose,
just slows down that process. So there's a whole lot of ways that this can be interesting.
And one more little fun fact, that production function that you listed there was invented by Senator Paul Douglas of Illinois.
I think I read that somewhere.
He knew exactly, and he had exactly the intuition you did.
And typically we say that A plus B is equal to one. That's called constant returns to scale.
Is that really required, constant returns to scale?
Yeah, it's always puzzled me why you sum them to one.
Well, because that means the production function is homogeneous at degree one, which means if you expand all the inputs, you expand the output.
There's no economies of scale.
Just a mathematical convenience, and it's approximately correct in a lot of situations.
I'm very sorry I have to run out of time. Are you going to be around to tea?
I'll be around all next week.
But I won't.
I'll be around this afternoon.
Yeah, where's your office?
It's way down there.
It's easy.
I'm sorry, I've got to think.
As soon as you came up with that final thing, and I was thinking, don't you feel that Joseph Tainter was basically trying to answer that with saying, yeah, when you get too much interactions and too much complexity built in as a
But he was talking about interaction within the group, over-complexification of administration and overly
In a sense, if we consider the group of planets.
Yeah, in a way, if you did this as a model of what's the optimal complexity of a society, you might come up with a Tainter conclusion that too much, too little, no good in between an optimum.
He often uses book scale in places like
He used to come up with a scale, and you just mentioned
He sort of says the scale is bigger and bigger and more efficient.
I don't agree with that efficiency, but he calls it that.
I don't either.
So he sort of says that means you're always going to go to bigger and bigger and bigger things.
This is sort of an antidote, even if I accept that definition of efficiency.
This is still like an antidote to that way of thinking.
It's not that one homogenous group is the best way to go.
That's right.
Exactly.
Mimi.
This may have been in your graphs, and they went by too fast for me.
Wait, I'm sorry.
This may have been in your graphs, and they may have gone by too fast for me to pick up.
But if the habitat is very poor in resources altogether, or very rich in resources altogether, does that affect either what the outcomes are or the rate at which they get there?
It's sort of cart before horse.
The model is telling us what it's predicting what the resources will be in each patch.
If we think of the resources as the nutrient content of the soil, carbon, and nitrogen, that's an outcome of the model, not an input to it.
But when you try to translate that to people, people living in the desert and people living in the forest, it's not like that.
When it comes to people, definitely we would have to either do some weird averaging over the whole nation's resource.
Just imagine lumping everything in the U.S. into a common resource.
That would be the ultimate in spherical cow modeling.
And that's how my instinct would be to do that first, then put in the complexity of people who live with bad soil, people who live with good soil.
On the trekker board, each patch was as good as enough.
Well, it starts out uniform, but it doesn't end up uniform because the model creates different levels of nitrogen in the different cells.
So you create heterogeneity, biologically, rather than impose it as a rigid constraint.
Thanks.
We'll see you guys 6.30, right? Yeah, good.